# Data Modeling with Prosgres

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project Description
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, you will need to define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.


## Data
### Songs Dataset
Songs dataset is a subset of the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.
Sample Record :
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset
Logs dataset is generated by Event Simulator. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.
Sample Record :
```
{"artist": null, "auth": "Logged In", "firstName": "Walter", "gender": "M", "itemInSession": 0, "lastName": "Frye", "length": null, "level": "free", "location": "San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA", "method": "GET","page": "Home", "registration": 1540919166796.0, "sessionId": 38, "song": null, "status": 200, "ts": 1541105830796, "userAgent": "\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"", "userId": "39"}
```

## Schema 
### Fact Table(s)
- songplays
    - songplay_id SERIAL,
    - start_time TIMESTAMP NOT NULL,
    - user_id INT NOT NULL,
    - level VARCHAR NOT NULL,
    - song_id VARCHAR(18),
    - artist_id VARCHAR(18),
    - session_id INT NOT NULL,
    - location VARCHAR NOT NULL,
    - user_agent VARCHAR NOT NULL,
    - PRIMARY KEY (songplay_id)

### Dimension Table(s)
- users
    - user_id INT
    - first_name VARCHAR NOT NULL
    - last_name VARCHAR NOT NULL
    - gender CHAR(1) NOT NULL
    - level VARCHAR NOT NULL
    - PRIMARY KEY (user_id)
- songs
    - song_id VARCHAR(18)
    - title VARCHAR NOT NULL
    - artist_id VARCHAR(18) NOT NULL
    - year INT NOT NULL
    - duration FLOAT NOT NULL
    - PRIMARY KEY (song_id)
- artists
    - artist_id VARCHAR(18)
    - name VARCHAR NOT NULL
    - location VARCHAR NOT NULL
    - latitude FLOAT
    - longitude FLOAT
    - PRIMARY KEY (artist_id)
- time
    - start_time TIMESTAMP NOT NULL
    - hour int NOT NULL
    - day int NOT NULL
    - week int NOT NULL
    - month int NOT NULL
    - year int NOT NULL
    - weekday int NOT NULL



## Project Files 
- sql_queries.py
    - This file contains all of the queires used to build, drop, and inset repws in the DB.  This also has the sql query for selecting a song.  
- create_tables.py
    - This file connects to the database and then creates all of the tables outlined within the sql_queries.py file.  Note - this will also drop existing tables if they are there before trying to create ones to ensure you have a clean slate after running this.  
- etl.ipynb
    - This is a working file that was used to create and test the fuctions within the etl.py file.  
- etl.py
    - This is the main file to run that executes the ETL pipeline.  It processes the json files and splits out the elements using pandas and then inserts them to the database. 
- test.ipynb
    - This is a testing file that needs to be run if you are going to be using the etl.ipynb and has test queries to see the output of the etl.ipynb in each table.  


## Enviorment 
- Python Version 3.6+
- PostgresSQL 9.5+
- psycopg2
- pandas 


## How to run (examples)

To build the schema(or to drop the tables and rebuild them) 
```python create_tables.py```

To execute the ETL to load data into the tables:
```python etl.py```

Seeing what is in the sql db <br>
```%sql SELECT * FROM users LIMIT 5;``` <br>
```%sql SELECT * FROM songplays LIMIT 5;```<br>
